MAD-NG Features and Compatibility Modes (#135)
pylhc/tfs: doc/tfsformat.rst

The accelerator physics codes `MAD-X <https://madx.web.cern.ch/>`_ and `MAD-NG <https://madx.web.cern.ch/releases/madng/html/>`_ output tables in the TFS format, and accept TFS files as input for tables.

The origin of the TFS definition [#f1]_ [#f2]_ seems more than difficult to find, and no official spec has been maintained since then.
As such, this document aims to provide a comprehensive description of the TFS format, at the very least as it is parsed and written by `tfs-pandas`.

Written TFS files follow a structure in two parts: first the ``headers`` lines and then the ``table`` itself.
They are described below, including their specifics.

Headers
-------

The first section of the TFS file contains `headers`, lines each containing a parameter, its type and its value.
All headers lines start with the `@` character, and have the following structure:

- The `@` character, to identify the line as a header.
- The name of the parameter.
- The type identifier of the parameter (see `Types and Identifiers`_ below).
- The value of the parameter.

An example header line is:

.. code-block::

>     @ NAME                   %le             0.269975

Reviewer: Very pedantic, but would this ever be an example? Surely `NAME` would be a string?

Author: Absolutely, good catch.

Following the example above, a few table lines would look like:

.. code-block::

    *             INTEGERS              STRINGS               FLOATS
    $                   %d                   %s                  %le
                         1            SOMETHING              4.51395
                     21345         "WITH SPACE"             123.4825

Types and Identifiers
---------------------

Type identifiers are specific strings that indicate as which type to interpret the given data as, in the individual entries of the `Headers`_ as well as for the columns of the `Table`_.
The following type identifiers and their corresponding Python types are accepted and used by `tfs-pandas`:

================  ======================  =============== =========================
Type Indentifier  Associated Python Type          Example               Accepted by
================  ======================  =============== =========================
%s                                string        `%s name`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%bpm_s                            string    `%bpm_s name`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``

> %d                        64-bit integer         `%d 174`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``

Reviewer: Looking at MAD-NG source code, I cannot see that %d is parsed in the headers - have you tested this? It doesn't matter in columns as it appears MAD-NG ignores the column type and parses item by item and just seems to convert to whatever it can, in the order number->complex->range->boolean->nil.

A little nuance: MAD-NG uses Lua 5.2, which does not have integers as such (https://www.lua.org/pil/2.3.html), so integers have a max of 52-bits (I believe this is the highest precision before its a float).

Author: Oh, interesting. I have not used `MAD-NG` for work, do you think you can quickly try to load the `tests/inputs/madng.tfs` file and see if that goes fine?

Author: Good catch. I just tried to have `MAD-NG` read the `tests/inputs/madng.tfs` file and it just cries with "invalid header field type: 'd'". I will have to work around that.

%hd                       64-bit integer        `%hd 174`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%f                          64-bit float       `%f 0.946`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%le                         64-bit float      `%hf 0.946`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%b                               boolean        `%b true`           Only ``MAD-NG``
%lz                      128-bit complex   `%lz 1.4+2.6i`           Only ``MAD-NG``
================  ======================  =============== =========================

It is also possible to include the length of the value into the type identifier, as in `%10s` for a string of length 10.

> `MAD-X` and `MAD-NG` inlcude the length in their output files, yet they are not mandatory to be able to read the files back into these programms. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MAD-X` and `MAD-NG` include the length in their output files, yet they are not mandatory to be able to read the files back into these programs. 
```
Or `programmes`?

While ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG`` inlcude this information in their output **TFS** files, they do not require it when reading.
For these reasons, by default `tfs-pandas` ignores the information when parsing files, and does not include it when writing them.

.. admonition:: MAD-NG Specific Types

    As can be seen in the table above, some types are specific to the ``MAD-NG`` code, such as boolean and complex types, and would not be accepted by ``MAD-X``.
    Please see the :doc:`compatibility section <compatibility>` for more information.

.. _tfs-pandas caveats:

TFS-Pandas Caveats
------------------

The following caveats apply to the `tfs-pandas` package:

- Column names should be strings.
- No spaces should be present in column names.
- The table should not contain duplicate indices.
- The table should not contain duplicate columns.
- If spaces are present in strings, they should be enclosed in either single or double quotes.

> - The table data should not contain nested structures (lists, tuples, etc.).

Reviewer: What happens when a user has created a tfs dataframe through pymadng and then tries to use tfs.write(...). Will you error, warn or ignore?

In theory, you shouldn't do this. I.e. You can just use pymadng to read and write all these tfs dataframes, but what if someone tries...

Author: I'll be honest, I have no idea exactly. Mostly likely is an error being raised.

I agree that in theory one should **not** do this. I don't particularly intend to cater to that use case. Eager for @JoschD's opinion

> - The table data should not contain non-physical values (``NaN``, ``Inf``, etc.) as they would not be read back by either ``MAD-X`` or ``MAD-NG``.

Reviewer: Not relevant to the point you're getting across, but are we sure this is the case for MAD-NG? 
I think `nan` and `inf` might be accepted by MAD-NG - therefore it might be possible for MAD-NG to output a table with such values - untested. I can look into this, if you think this might cause issues.

Also, I assume `None` or the equivalent Lua `nil` is in the etc?

The following type identifiers and their corresponding Python types are accepted and used by `tfs-pandas`:

================  ======================  =============== =========================
Type Indentifier  Associated Python Type          Example               Accepted by
================  ======================  =============== =========================
%s                                string        `%s name`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%bpm_s                            string    `%bpm_s name`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%d                        64-bit integer         `%d 174`            Only ``MAD-X``
%hd                       64-bit integer        `%hd 174`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%f                          64-bit float       `%f 0.946`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%le                         64-bit float      `%hf 0.946`  ``MAD-X`` and ``MAD-NG``
%b                               boolean        `%b true`           Only ``MAD-NG``
%lz                      128-bit complex   `%lz 1.4+2.6i`           Only ``MAD-NG``
================  ======================  =============== =========================

> 

Author: According to the MAD-X user guide if is for all (https://madx.web.cern.ch/madx/releases/last-rel/madxuguide.pdf). Have not seen it implemented anywhere like this for non-strings though, and I know MAD-NG also only writes it for strings.
